README.md, before:

# The Alto parser

Welcome to Alto, the Algebraic Language Toolkit.

Alto is a parser and decoder for Interpreted Regular Tree Grammars (IRTGs). It is being developed at the [University of Potsdam](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/en/) in the Theoretical Computational Linguistics group, led by [Alexander Koller](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~koller/). Its main features are:

- Represents grammars from a wide variety of popular grammar formalisms as IRTGs, including:
	- Context-free grammars
	- Tree-adjoining grammars (TAG)
	- Tree automata and bottom-up tree transducers
	- Synchronous context-free grammars, TAG, etc.
	- Tree-to-string and string-to-tree transducers
	- Synchronous Hyperedge Replacement Grammars (HRG): Alto is the [fastest published HRG parser in the world](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~koller/showpaper.php?id=sgraph-parsing-15)
	- and many more
- Implements chart-based algorithms for
	- parsing
	- synchronous parsing (with inputs from multiple sides of a synchronous grammar)
	- decoding (to another side of a synchronous grammar)
	- computing 1-best (Viterbi) and k-best derivations
	- maximum likelihood and expectation maximization (EM) training
	- binarization
- Supports PCFG-style and log-linear probability models for all of these grammar formalisms.
- Built for easy extensibility: implement your own grammar formalism by adding an [Algebra](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/wiki/Algebras) class, and use any of the Alto algorithms directly.
- Comes with a GUI that provides access to most of these algorithms and visualizes parsing results.

The basic theory of IRTGs is explained in [Koller & Kuhlmann, IWPT 2011](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~koller/showpaper.php?id=irtg-11). You can find more details on the [Literature](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/wiki/Literature) page.

Alto requires [Java 8](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jre8-downloads-2133155.html) and can be downloaded [here](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/downloads).

See the [Wiki](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/wiki/Home) for more details on how to use Alto. The [tutorials](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/wiki/Tutorials) are a good way to get started. For advanced usage, you can check out the [Apidocs](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/tcl/alto/apidocs/).

If you run into trouble, please feel free to ask for help on [our Google group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/alto-users), or you can [submit an issue](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/issues?status=new&status=open).

## JavaDoc ##

You can find the JavaDoc API documentation [here](http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/alto/apidocs/index.html).

## Screenshots ##

Here are some screenshots of the Alto GUI. Here's an IRTG with one string and one graph interpretation (equivalent to a synchronous HRG):

![Screen Shot 2015-05-27 at 16.18.42.png](https://bitbucket.org/repo/ny94Mo/images/1617309522-Screen%20Shot%202015-05-27%20at%2016.18.42.png)

Here's the result of parsing "the boy wants to go" with this grammar:

![Screen Shot 2015-05-27 at 16.23.49.png](https://bitbucket.org/repo/ny94Mo/images/1198790576-Screen%20Shot%202015-05-27%20at%2016.23.49.png)


## Version History ##

**Version 2.1, April 2017**

- Improved intersection and invhom algorithms (condensed, sibling-finder) for much faster PCFG, TAG, and HRG parsing (Groschwitz et al., ACL 2016).
- Added pruning techniques, including beam search and coarse-to-fine parsing.
- Added adaptive importance sampler for grammar induction (Teichmann et al., ACL 2016 Workshop on Statistical NLP and Weighted Automata).
- Added "inside" binarization strategy (Klein & Manning 2003).
- Added command-line scripts for parsing and grammar/corpus conversion.
- Initial support for running reproducible experiments using Alto Lab.
- Many small bugfixes and performance improvements.



**Version 2.0, July 2015**

- Initial Bitbucket release.


## Contributors ##

* Danilo Baumgarten (BSc University of Potsdam, 2013)
* Johannes Gontrum (BSc University of Potsdam, 2015)
* [Jonas Groschwitz](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~groschwitz)
* [Alexander Koller](http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/~koller/)
* [Christoph Teichmann](https://www.cteichmann.com/)

Commit message:

Added Apache License to README.md and updated some links.

README.md, after:

# The Alto parser

Welcome to Alto, the Algebraic Language Toolkit.

Alto is a parser and decoder for Interpreted Regular Tree Grammars (IRTGs). It is being developed at [Saarland University](http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/) in the Computational Linguistics group, led by [Alexander Koller](http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/~koller/). Its main features are:

- Represents grammars from a wide variety of popular grammar formalisms as IRTGs, including:
	- Context-free grammars
	- Tree-adjoining grammars (TAG)
	- Tree automata and bottom-up tree transducers
	- Synchronous context-free grammars, TAG, etc.
	- Tree-to-string and string-to-tree transducers
	- Synchronous Hyperedge Replacement Grammars (HRG): Alto is the [fastest published HRG parser in the world](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~koller/showpaper.php?id=sgraph-parsing-15)
	- and many more
- Implements chart-based algorithms for
	- parsing
	- synchronous parsing (with inputs from multiple sides of a synchronous grammar)
	- decoding (to another side of a synchronous grammar)
	- computing 1-best (Viterbi) and k-best derivations
	- maximum likelihood and expectation maximization (EM) training
	- binarization
- Supports PCFG-style and log-linear probability models for all of these grammar formalisms.
- Built for easy extensibility: implement your own grammar formalism by adding an [Algebra](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/wiki/Algebras) class, and use any of the Alto algorithms directly.
- Comes with a GUI that provides access to most of these algorithms and visualizes parsing results.

Alto is published under a [Apache 2.0 license](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

The basic theory of IRTGs is explained in [Koller & Kuhlmann, IWPT 2011](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~koller/showpaper.php?id=irtg-11). You can find more details on the [Literature](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/wiki/Literature) page.

Alto requires [Java 8](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jre8-downloads-2133155.html) and can be downloaded [here](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/downloads).

See the [Wiki](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/wiki/Home) for more details on how to use Alto. The [tutorials](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/wiki/Tutorials) are a good way to get started. For advanced usage, you can check out the [Apidocs](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/tcl/alto/apidocs/).

If you run into trouble, please feel free to ask for help on [our Google group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/alto-users), or you can [submit an issue](https://bitbucket.org/tclup/alto/issues?status=new&status=open).

## JavaDoc ##

You can find the JavaDoc API documentation [here](http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/alto/apidocs/index.html).

## Screenshots ##

Here are some screenshots of the Alto GUI. Here's an IRTG with one string and one graph interpretation (equivalent to a synchronous HRG):

![Screen Shot 2015-05-27 at 16.18.42.png](https://bitbucket.org/repo/ny94Mo/images/1617309522-Screen%20Shot%202015-05-27%20at%2016.18.42.png)

Here's the result of parsing "the boy wants to go" with this grammar:

![Screen Shot 2015-05-27 at 16.23.49.png](https://bitbucket.org/repo/ny94Mo/images/1198790576-Screen%20Shot%202015-05-27%20at%2016.23.49.png)


## Version History ##

**Version 2.1, April 2017**

- Improved intersection and invhom algorithms (condensed, sibling-finder) for much faster PCFG, TAG, and HRG parsing (Groschwitz et al., ACL 2016).
- Added pruning techniques, including beam search and coarse-to-fine parsing.
- Added adaptive importance sampler for grammar induction (Teichmann et al., ACL 2016 Workshop on Statistical NLP and Weighted Automata).
- Added "inside" binarization strategy (Klein & Manning 2003).
- Added command-line scripts for parsing and grammar/corpus conversion.
- Initial support for running reproducible experiments using Alto Lab.
- Many small bugfixes and performance improvements.



**Version 2.0, July 2015**

- Initial Bitbucket release.


## Contributors ##

* Danilo Baumgarten (BSc University of Potsdam, 2013)
* Johannes Gontrum (BSc University of Potsdam, 2015)
* [Jonas Groschwitz](http://www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/~groschwitz)
* [Alexander Koller](http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/~koller/)
* [Christoph Teichmann](https://www.cteichmann.com/)
